foreign
[Music]
accomplishment where we explore how
deepening connection with ourselves and
others leads to creating the life we
want with enjoyment and ease I'm Brett
kisler here today with my co-host Joe
Hudson
how's it going Joe
hmm I am a little tired
yeah as you might imagine
I am I feel incredibly refreshed on one
level but my um
we just did Burning Man my first burning
man after 21 years
and I am definitely
um I'm definitely uh feeling the wear
and tear on my on my body but I'm mostly
recovered but still not tired yeah same
I had first burning man since the
pandemic
um and you know a great pandemic return
Burning Man including getting covered
right in the middle of it dropping into
102 degree fever with 118 degree desert
breathing dust it's like what is what is
covet and what is just being out here in
the dusting that here hard to tell
but yeah I slept for about 48 hours when
I got back and I'm a human again now
I think it's Burning Man actually that
made me think about this topic for today
and what I watched is especially the
older Burning Man more than this but
it's a chance for people to try on
different identities like be not who
they normally think of themselves as at
home
and I think that's part of what and that
and also following up on the grief
episode and how we spoke about identity
I was like oh we really haven't gone
into the idea of identity so much so
yeah we've had a lot of people reach out
and say wow I love the grief episode and
I was I was amazed at how much of it was
really about identity and you know to
people connecting to that on various
levels and it seems like a really good
thing to go into now
um especially you know after both of us
having having whatever kind of identity
experience is burning man brings about
yeah
yeah it's funny because that's actually
what I said when I was with people I'm
like I just very much
for those of you who know me as a
teacher please
can you not treat me like that for for
the next five days while we're burning
man yeah how well did that go
I think I violated it more than anybody
else but there's probably only like
about you know 10 violations or
something like that which is pretty good
there's a it was it was nice A lot of
people just yeah it was a different
level of intimacy so it's quite sweet
well so let's let's get into what is
this thread of identity that has
followed through so many of our episodes
yeah let's let's just Define it let's
pull it out into the open
yeah that's a hard one to Define
um
so I would say it's like the ideas and
emotional states even maybe the gut
reactions
um that we identify as Who We Are
it's it's the way in which we recognize
ourselves I would say like that on the
most course level that's what it is
and
and I and I think about it like um
you know some people for instance let's
just say there's one person who plays
the violin and they really is a huge
identity piece for them right it's it's
and the deeper the more personally you
take it the more of an identity it is so
there's some people who like oh
they pick up a violin once they play it
and they're like they don't identify as
a violin player
somebody's like you shouldn't play
violin they're like okay like it's less
of a personal thing
whereas somebody else is like loves
violating it's their thing it's their
passion they've been doing it for a
while and someone's like you shouldn't
buy play the violin it's going to be far
more personal it's going to be a part of
their identity so it's really how we
recognize ourselves and that's the way I
would I would think about
but not just intellectually but also
like the emotional states that we run or
the gut reactions and nervous system
responses that we have
yeah yeah the way I experience it is
that there's this
structure that identity is kind of like
a structure like some kind of
inner or exoskeleton of
what we think we are
and there are ways that that's sometimes
is
helpful for our growth you know like
trying on an identity trying on the
public speaker trying on the violin play
or trying on the CEO yeah and it can
also become something limiting
that if we believe we are something or
we must be something or we believe that
we are not something
in relation to ourselves or the world
then I like one of the things that I
found about this this path is that it's
a process of continuously stepping out
of identities into the unknown and
leaving identities behind like snakeskin
yeah yeah I
right my experience is that you can't
leave your identity completely like
without any identity there's like I
don't know if you're psychologically
capable of speaking right so
so there's and there is this kind of
refinement of not kind of there's a
refinement of
every time you see through an identity
that's limiting you there's a chance to
discover the way that this new identity
also limits you right so there's there's
like every epiphany of identity then
becomes the next rut of the identity as
well so
so yeah it is a process and and it
doesn't ever go away but there's a way
in which it becomes more transparent
there's a way in which it you know
yeah so which brings up a question then
it's how do we recognize
the difference between an identity
that we're taking on and genuine
self-recognition of seeing some aspect
of ourselves that we haven't seen
through a previous identity
I don't understand the distinction can
you yeah can you or just like it again
yeah to or just to compare like aspects
of ourselves that are not identity and
then aspects of ourselves that we have
an identity formed around
yeah I think it's how personally you
take it is really I think the the way
that you is the the depth of the how
personal it is to you is the way in
which to see how much of an identity it
is
and the the difficulty there is that
some of the parts of identity you might
not even see
you know so what's an example of that
I'll give you two examples like one in
the intellectual space I think and one
in the emotional space so they're both
kind of both
so there's this great
study that they did with kids and they
told one group of kids you're you're
really smart and they took told another
group of kids that you're hard working
and then they gave them an impossible
math test and then they showed them that
they failed the math test
and they said okay now you're going to
take the test again it's going to be
slightly different but it's the same
basic test
the kids who were told that they were
smart were far
less likely to try the second time
because if they tried and failed they
would be proving that they weren't smart
so they were holding on to that identity
the kids who were told
um your hard-working
were far more likely to try hard and
improve on the second test so
now
maybe those kids could say
I have an identity of being smart
maybe those kids just think they're
smart maybe those kids aren't even
conscious of that
subconscious identity that's occurring
and I think it's the same for humans
I'll give you a for instance of that on
the emotional level so
I was I was in El Salvador and and I got
the news that I was sitting in a hammock
and I got the news that WhatsApp had
just sold for whatever billions of
dollars to Facebook
and the venture capitalist who put his
own money into it
turned 400
000 into billions or some such thing
and I just got this kick in my stomach
just like it was like a gut punch
and I immediately said oh what what is
what is that feeling what's the first
time I felt it I closed my eyes I
followed my body not my mind to the very
first time I felt that experience and it
was around trying to get my dad's love
and I recognized in that moment I had an
identity of
having emotional experience of chasing
something that I wasn't allowed to have
or couldn't ever get and then feeling
deprived and resentful
and that chain of emotional experiences
had become a part of my identity
but it was subconscious I had no idea
that until that moment I had no idea
that that was part of the identity and
that it had played out with money it had
played out with bosses it had played out
with my dad it played out with women's
love that emotional uh roller coaster
was part of my identity it was how I
knew myself to be but it wasn't
particularly conscious yeah so it's hard
to say you're taking it personally and
at the same time saying you might not be
conscious of it but that that is how it
that's how it works yeah it seems like
there's a there's a distinction between
like the beliefs that we're aware that
we have of ourselves and then there's
just the deeper conditioning for example
the the kids that are told you're hard
working yeah and they're like great I'm
hard working you're going to give me
another test I'm going to work hard at
it and that's the thing that I've been
conditioned with reinforcement or
punishment to to be and that's not
necessarily the the way that I would be
entirely with without conditioning or
with different conditioning and so that
person might show up later on in life
and be the one who overworks themselves
and doesn't take doesn't take breaks to
to give them themselves rest when they
need it because correct well I'm I'm the
one who's hard working I show up and I
get the things done correct and that's
that's just what I am that's how I
always am and that's the idea is that
every way that we Define ourselves has
its own limitations so it's not like the
person who sees through their identity
of hard-working stops working forever
and never works again it's they have the
flexibility to know that they are Beyond
hard-working or not hard working smart
or not smart
so
so it's exactly that and whether it's
conditioning
and therefore an unconscious sense of
identity
it's really about how strongly placed it
is in our sense of self whether it's
conscious or unconscious and all of them
have limits yeah yeah and a way to
recognize that is how defensive we are
of it or or even just what physical
response arises correct to correct
that's right
right how much what kind of constriction
what kind of Defense what kind of you
know oh my gosh what what would I be
without that crates fear there's lots of
physical responses that tell people it's
and they're typically the parts of
ourselves that we're like how do I
change that like once we've recognized
it and our mind is like oh this is a
limiting like part of my identity I
don't want to be identified in this way
anymore
um that they when we have them when it's
part of what we call our identity then
it's very challenging for people to
it's actually not that hard but
for most you know once you know the
tricks and the hacks but for most folks
that these are the hardest things about
ourselves to change yeah that points to
an interesting phenomenon where in
self-work a lot of people will recognize
that they have an identity and they want
to live past that identity and sometimes
they will change their lives they'll
change their names they'll move into a
different yeah social group to take on a
different identity yeah but without
exploring the subconscious components of
that identity they just end up
recreating that new identity with a
different name a different group of
friends a different spirituality a
different
different boyfriend a different husband
a different yeah absolutely yeah and I
think the other thing is just that you
asked a question which is like how do I
identify what is part of our identity
and what is not
the other way is the opposite which is
like if you're in view around a topic
about yourself there's less of a chance
that you're an identity meaning
um if you are if it's easy for you to be
vulnerable around it if you're impartial
about it if you have empathy for others
around it if you are and wonder about it
it's far less likely to be
um you know a a strong part of your
identity this reminds me of the
projections episode that we had where
one of the kinds of projections that we
have is the projections we have on
ourselves
and then being in view with that being
like Oh do I do I
consciously or subconsciously identify
as the person who gets rejected or
yes as the person who puts in more work
than everybody else and doesn't get
appreciated for it yeah that's right and
then with that you can be in The Wonder
of well what is it that I'm actually
feeling underneath this
yeah yes absolutely and and and so in at
once like the practice of you is is not
just like a communication tool it's also
and in the long term it's a
it tenderizes our identity it allows our
identity to be more transparent
I like that term tenderization yeah
yeah generally there's sort of a an
attitude of like deconstruction of
identity in sort of the personal
development and self-exploration and
like meditation esoteric spaces yeah and
I feel like that can almost become
sort of a opposition
for example like kill your ego or right
people walk around with the identity of
being the egoless one yeah yeah
and so what makes it something you're a
bit of a pain in the ass aren't they
having been one myself I'd like to say
yeah we are yeah exactly
yeah I guess a question is like what it
seems like there's a constant tension
here that can occur and yeah there can
be a process that kind of goes back and
forth between being in an identity that
we are not aware of and then identifying
that Identity or identifying something
next to it as a surrogate for it and
then wanting to break it down seeing it
is a bad thing
and what makes that what what would you
say it makes that something that we have
tension with rather than just being a
natural process with well I mean the
point of response is identity meaning
once we identify
um
like there's no I'll put a d this way
there is no good or bad around identity
right so
and you can be limited by your identity
in some ways and and
and your identity can offer you a lot of
possibilities in other ways and so
the trick is more about flexibility is
to see yourself Beyond
the identity
um see through it the identity becomes
more transparent if you will
and so some people go around saying okay
the right identity is to be the happy
one or the
um altruistic one or the one who cares
but even those identities create some
limitations right so
caretakers are often identified as the
person who cares are all altruistic yeah
and so
um so every identity has
some component of it that limits us and
sometimes that's great like identify as
a as a person who loves your husband or
your
wife and or father and there's like a
lot of beauty and awesomeness in that
and it's and it so it's not an idea of
I'm gonna have no identity because
there's no possibility of that
um it's far more about finding the
flexibility in the identity that's what
that's what it's like yeah so if I take
on the identity of the I'm a vulnerable
person I'm loving I'm in view to the
extent that that becomes an identity
then I also start filtering my reality
to see the to see that it is true and to
see less of the evidence to the contrary
to not notice where I'm not being fully
loving to not notice where I'm dropped
out of view and if I'm in you know
holding in defense
or you could have the identity of like
I'm not vulnerable enough right and then
you don't see the evidence that You're
vulnerable or that you're moving towards
vulnerability I mean this is something
that you got to see at Burning Man a lot
like you can see people how long have
you how how far how many years have you
been coming you know and some people
have a lot of identity in that they're
like 15 years it's like a really big
thing they want people to know like hey
like you should be impressed I've been
coming for a long time and yeah
um
and some people are like 15 years and
it's like not part of their identity at
all
um so it's it's just a like a it's a
it does it if you can't see through your
identity you're blinded to something
there's some part of your there's some
part of yourself that you can't see
yeah that brings up an interesting piece
about how we can attach our identity to
an identity we create of some external
concept like burning man like we can
those who have been going to Burning Man
for a long time often have an identity
of what they believe Burning Man is and
represents
and then they themselves feel associated
with it or defensive in ways that they
might not see and the same is true for a
company as a as a CEO as a as a Founder
as an early employee
we developed these identities of what we
are in relation to this organization
what the organization is in relation to
the world and then without without
inspecting and seeing through those
identities then we might not see how
we're limiting our our range of motion
and emotion in our roles limiting our
business yeah like
I can hear something I can say if I have
a CEO who's let's say a hoarder
let's I'm just make you know making this
up here
kinda
um
let's say I have one who has a tendency
to save everything
um I guarantee you that there's going to
be a whole bunch of projects that should
be killed
in their company that they haven't
killed
um if I
um have a
a CEO with the identity of
if I'm vulnerable I I'm not vulnerable
because people will hurt me
then I guarantee you that there is a
lack of
team camaraderie in their particular
executive team because they don't feel
the intimacy in depth with the CEO
so
[Music]
our identity absolutely influences the
businesses that we're running or the
teams that we're running or who we're
leading in that way I think this this
points also to the avoided emotions that
prop up the identity because the first
one of the hoarder like there's I
identify with that a lot there's been a
lot of times where I'm like
I don't want to lay anybody off I want
to keep the team together I don't want
to cancel anyone's projects or any pet
ways that they might grow who am I to
say that this isn't going to work and
really in in those periods of my life
the things that I've been avoiding by
holding that identity together have been
just to feel the to feel the fomo and to
feel the disappointment to feel the loss
to feel there's some cost to just allow
that feeling of as to go back to that
last episode grief
yeah to feel the grief of
whatever it is that I thought was worth
holding on to recognizing that it's time
to let it go yeah the more willing I am
to feel that feeling the less I need to
identify as the one who's able to hold
it all together and be able to hold all
these pieces and not lose one
yeah that's right and and so that's that
so this is where you get to people where
they're just like oh I see that I'm not
that but I'm still acting like that
right I see that I am you know a good
person but I'm still acting like a bad
person right like
projection of good or bad is yeah
exactly so
and typically that's because rationally
they get it but the emotional experience
is still identified you know I'm still
identified with
um rejecting grief or I'm still
um the feeling that the fear that I have
to feel if I don't care take people or
if I don't take care of people or
whatever and that and the resistance to
that emotion has been part of people's
identity typically since they were five
four three eight ten years old like the
idea of letting people down and trying
not to so that they don't feel
disappointed in you
is didn't first happen in your company
right and so
so that that is like this core part of
the identity and if you can fully allow
those feelings to be felt and going
through those experiences then you can
identify emotionally as something else
and so that the patterns can change
pretty rapidly
and that's what makes it that's what
makes it so people think it's so hard to
change identity stuff right it's not
hard it's just a big part of it is
allowing the emotional experience yeah
yeah it's hard to change your identity
from your head within your house yes
nearly impossible not entirely I've seen
it done but it's it's not consistent and
it takes a long time
yeah what are what are some other things
that would make it make it hard to
change what are some of the other kind
of yeah great questions roadblocks might
come up here
one is that you've been justifying and
validating it for years so you've kind
of got an entrenched neuro system you
know it's like
let's say part of the identity is
overweight and and part of that is the
thought process that it's hard to lose
weight and you know for 16 years you've
been quitting diets with the
justification that it's been hard to
lose weight
um as a for instance
um
that's not to say it's not hard to lose
like I'm not saying that everybody can
lose weight immediately etc etc but I'm
saying that that if you validate and you
look for evidence over like 20-year
period of time
it's very hard to undo that neural
pathway
or it seems to be hard
um it's also
um
there's also a question of uh like fear
of self without it like
it's a form of death I mean there's a
reason that you know the metaphor of
Jesus on the cross it's like oh if
you're going to give up a part of your
identity it can feel very much like
death like oh and it's not just death
because you don't know how you're going
to act or how to shop or how to
interact with people but it's also a
death in the fact that everybody that
you're interacting with you're now
different so will they keep on
interacting with you so if you've always
had the identification of the person
that everybody needs to help and you're
like I don't like that at identity
anymore I'm gonna move to the identity
of the person who's like totally [__]
capable
and all of a sudden all your friends are
like wait I was just in it so I could
help somebody and feel better than you
right and they're all gone and and
whether that's true or not you're gonna
fear it you're gonna fear the fact that
if I'm Different maybe I won't be loved
maybe I won't be supported yeah and
maybe I won't know who the [__] I am and
that feels like a death because you
don't know and when I say death it's
like it's literally meaning I don't know
what it's going to look like after this
event horizon
every time a big piece of your identity
leaves it's like a it's like a
singularity and the fact that you don't
know what's going to happen after that
event horizon yeah now you do it enough
times you start to get a pretty good you
know you can gauge it pretty well you
can say okay and it becomes a little
less scary but most people don't spend
their life figuring out how to overcome
the parts of their identity that limit
them or how to make their identity more
transparent yeah something's been
helpful for me in this process has been
recognizing that whenever whenever I
come like kind of face to face with an
identity that needs that's like ready to
die yeah there's the recognition that
this was never actually me right that
the what was actually happening is that
the relationships that I had were based
on people seeing me in the way that I
was presenting myself yes and the way
that I was relating to myself and the
way that I was organizing my life was
being arranged around an image of Myself
That Never Was Real
and then when when that gets let go
there's there's a feeling of death
because there's I don't know what I am
now yeah but there's also the
recognition that this was always some
kind of death there was always a deeper
part of me that was being suppressed and
being yeah held in place that now gets
to live yeah absolutely and I think
that's why there's a like my experiences
at any time a big piece of my identity
is seen through
um there's grief
there's like a grieving process and I've
seen that with so many clients when like
a big chunk of what they how they
identify Falls away there's a grief
experience that goes along with it
yeah beautiful scene yeah yeah so
there's this it seems like in general
life is a process of
identity
just recalibrating
reabsorbing new information reorganizing
and dying and allowing more to come
through but it can be more or less jerky
or more or less smooth and continuous of
a process yeah there's I mean like if
you look at the long Arc of the process
I would say there's things like
um you start to recognize that every
part of your identity that's Limited
is a part of yourself that shows that
there's something you can't love
so whether it's
you know something that you think is
negative like I don't work hard enough
then you can't love that aspect or if
it's something that you think is
positive like
I'm a hard worker then you can't love
the lazy part of yourself right so it's
like in it so one of the things that you
recognize is one way to think about your
identity from an emotional space from a
heart space is that your identity is
is exactly the parts of yourself that
you can't love
that your limited identity is exactly
the parts of yourself that you can't
love
and so as you learn to love these parts
it's not that the identity it's not like
we walk around with no identity because
that it's psychologically impossible
right there's there's somebody who's
speaking to so to say there's a thought
that's had and somebody who's
recognizing that thought or something
that's recognizing that thought
but what does happen is like as you
learn from an emotional point of view as
you learn to love it
um and love all the aspects of yourself
the identity becomes far more fluid it
becomes far more transparent it starts
to identify with uh Oneness or
nothingness or
um love or peace or inherent goodness
like the identification becomes softer
it becomes more Universal it um it
becomes more gentle it becomes less
rigid it becomes more fluid
and I think that's like so if you're
looking at the long Arc of it that's a
really important thing to see and at
some point you will identify
all those identities also become their
own roadblocks right like right the the
identity of Oneness has its own
limitations and so at some point you're
like oh I'm I'm
Oneness and I'm I'm everything and I'm
nothing and and to be able to see both
aspects of that and then more fluidity
more transparency
and it's to say I'm a great CEO to be
able to see that I'm a horrible CEO to
be able to see that
um is like to be able to see all the
aspects of yourself all the aspects of
the diamond so to speak it allows for
far more light to shine through if it
allows for the beauty to be there and it
allows for a far more
both sustainable and
a flexible resilient
kind of uh sense of self
yeah and there's another thing that's
been interesting in the work that we've
done together of recognizing you know so
I might identify recognize myself
identifying as a CEO who's a good CEO
the bad CEO and then I can go up a level
well am I the one identifying as the one
that recognizes that I care about what
kind of CEO I am and feel tension around
that yeah and like what it might be on
that like what makes it important or I
am the or am I the awareness that
notices all these thoughts or am I the
right Etc it can go on right and so the
question is what's useful
the question is what serves
the question is what allows you to be
your most authentic self and and
flexibility is a huge part of that
flexibility both in context and in and
in and in the specifics
yeah beautifully said and I want to
bring this also just again back down to
the emotions into the body too because
something that's just really common in
in a moment of having
of seeing through an identity or in
coaching with pointing when somebody
has their identity kind of challenged or
like surfaced yeah there's so often I
think maybe always some kind of an
emotional or physical process that
occurs and there's a revelation of
something emotional or physical that has
been holding it in place yes
whether that is avoided grief in the in
the example that I described earlier
about wanting to keep everything
together and not feel like any
opportunity was ever left on the table
but also then there's like muscular
tension underneath these things like
what is it to what level am I holding my
Identity or my character structure in
the tension in my body by being the one
who's ready for
anything the one who's always watching
scanning for threats or the one who's
ready to be there and love anybody who's
in distress or
yeah I don't know if that's an
answerable question like how how much of
it is being held it's being inhaled in
place in on like on three levels one
level is the the intellectual structure
of it that you may or may not recognize
or see through the one is the emotional
structure of it that you may or may not
see through
and
um and then there's the nervous system
part of it which you may or may not see
through like the reactive the jump the
oh [__] the
I have to you know it's like that that
quick startle that comes with a lot of
these identities that the immediate
defensiveness and
but if you're looking to see through
your identity it needs to be seen
through in all three levels
and sometimes that happens just
naturally because you see it
intellectually and then the emotions
just move and sometimes you can just
move the emotions and you can see
through it intellectually and so it can
all happen kind of in one big movement
but all three movements have to happen
for you to actually be actually be able
to get full
flexibility in that in that level of
your identity
yeah yeah just kind of close that out
just bringing bringing that back into
some of my process of initially
identifying as The Fearless One yeah and
then identifying as the calm one and
then recognizing that there was actually
that was compensating for anxiety yeah
and then recognizing identifying as the
anxious one
and then recognizing that every time I
actually feel my anxiety
it's not me it's just conditioning and
it orients my attention towards
something that may be important or may
map onto something that was important in
my past and is no longer relevant
right and then identifying as as the
unknown what is underneath all of that
so as my anxiety comes up or as my as a
feeling or as a grief arises and moves
through me am I identifying as that
thing like here's another piece of
evidence that I am this way or am I
identifying as
the one that's feeling this feeling
right now and discovering what's
underneath it and Beyond it right or you
identifying as that which is beyond it
or yeah the interesting thing is on some
level you talked about
all the levels there there's an
intellectual piece of like oh I am not
scared because I am doing this stuff I
have evidence and that was like the
intellectual aspect and then there was
the
nervous system aspect of like oh I'm
gonna feel into this I'm every time I'm
scared if I'm feeling into it then
something different is happening that's
like the nervous that's addressing the
nervous system aspect of it and then the
emotional aspect of going oh wait my
body is actually scared all the time no
matter what I'm trying to tell myself
intellectually so in a weird way not
only were you giving us a metaphor for
the long-term Journey but you're also
giving us a metaphor for
the three aspects of of changing your
identity around fear
yeah yeah
cool and is there anything else you'd
like to say on this
no that felt really good that felt like
a great ending yeah
yeah I would I guess there is one more
thing I would like to say which is the
thing that you said about ego
like having a fight with your identity
only is more identity it only makes it
stick harder
um the object isn't to
isn't to get away from Identity it's to
love it and it's to see it for what it
is it's not to beat it or kick it into
submission like it's the same with the
ego
more like a Chinese finger trap less
like boxing
yes exactly exactly well well played sir
well played
awesome well thank you I really enjoyed
this yeah man so did I thank you very
much okay bye
thanks for listening to the art of
accomplishment if you enjoyed what you
heard today please subscribe and rate US
on your podcast app we'd love your
feedback so feel free to send us
questions or comments you can reach out
to us join our newsletter or check out
our courses at Art of accomplishment.com
[Music]